---
type: "long-form"
slug: "/should-humanity-settle-mars/"
date: "2024-07-09"
title: "Should Humanity Settle Mars?"
description: "On whether the red planet should be settled"
image: 41.png
color: yellow
---

Had you asked at nearly any point in the last fifteen years if I were religious, I would have answered resolutely in the negative; being an atheist and an anti-theist was core to my identity. But now, due to a confrontation with my own moral failings, I must say that I am a Christian — albeit one who cannot bring himself not to be ultimately agnostic when it comes to the question of whether God literally exists. Having never met God, nor heard His voice, nor witnessed any miracle, I cannot claim to know that Christianity is literally true. I can, however, claim to be Christian in the sense that I pray, I admire the example of Christ, and I behave as if an omnipotent and benevolent overseer is with me always.

The turning that occurred within me from an atheist position to a religious one was begotten by a realization of what the function of religion is — or ought to be. This realization was in turn the result of coming to terms with the fact that, for most of my life, I have behaved in a darkly selfish way. I know many people who are not religious and yet still act in a saint-like manner. So I cannot say that atheism was the cause of my amorality. But the saintly atheists are exceptional. Most people would benefit from a belief in a higher power, and I can no longer count myself as being outside that majority. We, the people who require a God, do so because we fail in confrontation with the multiplicity of ethical outcomes that arise from any given decision, and the higher power is an assistant in navigating a world of those endlessly complex consequential outcomes.

From each moral action taken stems a cascade of consequences of which we can only be partially aware. The saintly atheist has no problem choosing the actions that beget the best of these consequences without prayer and the eternal observer. But, as an atheist, I have demonstrated that I do not elicit the best of outcomes — not by any means. I have a tendency, which I have also noticed in my fellow man, to be cruel and cold toward others, often those closest and most loving toward me. Religion is an antidote to this inadequacy. Everyone must be familiar with the phenomenon that one behaves differently when alone and when around different groups of people. Observers demonstrably affect our behavior in accordance with the characteristics of those observers. For those of us who do better with religion in our lives, we must owe it to the imposition of the constant presence of an eternal, ultimately moral observer.

This eternal observer must in turn owe its beneficial effects to the fact that it simply reduces the variance of one's behavior, as well as the fact that it moves the curve from the negative end of the distribution to the positive end. This is due to the two necessary characteristics that God has: omnipresence and benevolence. Without these, God won't do anyone much good.

When I write that God is omnipresent, I do not mean to imply that this is a presence that I feel in the sense that I would feel the presence of another person. God to me is simply a hypothetical entity with which to have a moral dialog — not knowably real in the same way an object or another person is, but real enough to get the job done. This attitude might be called prayerful agnosticism. The dialog that one has with God both maintains the illusion of His presence and it serves to make moral reasoning linguistic and therefore explicit. (I use the word dialog to describe prayer because there are two entities, the one who prays and the one who listens. I do not hear the voice of God, and I am skeptical of anyone to whom he does speak.) This making explicit of moral reasoning has the effect of pulling from pre-linguistic liminal consciousness the thoughts that eventually become actions. By describing one's actions and desires, they take on a starker definition that leaves them more open to scrutiny. This is an aid to the habitually amoral sinner.

When one is in the habit of asking God for solutions to the banal problems of everyday life — as one inevitably does when one talks to God daily — one eventually tires of bothering the all-powerful creator of everything with stupid things, making one more determined to solve them oneself. Count this reinforcing effect as a benefit of prayer to the lazy and stultified.

Another benefit of prayer that I will write about here is that it simply reinforces the presence of the eternal judgmental observer. One might be worried that selfishly asking God to solve one's problems might itself be a moral failing, but, if it causes one to keep realizing that God is watching, then it is good and needs not to be questioned too closely. If nonetheless the selfishness of prayer continues to bother, simply pray for others.

I have so far laid out why a belief in, and a dialog with, a higher power is beneficial to one's moral character, but I have said nothing of why I have chosen Christianity and the Abrahamic God as the anchors of my moral worldview. The truth of it is that this choice was made for me when I was born into a Western culture with Christian moral underpinnings. To the extent that I am educated about Christ's example, I find that it comports well with what goodness already means to me, and this is undoubtedly due to the aforementioned Christian cultural context of my birth and upbringing.

What of the other world religions? If I imagine myself to have been born into a Buddhist, Hindu, or Muslim context, I cannot help but think that I would turn to some aspect of those religions when the interactions of my genes with my environment would inevitably have led me to a similar crisis as has made me turn to Christ. I make no claim for the superiority of Christianity, and I would advise anyone in a place of desperation to turn to whichever religion or spiritual system is most salient to them. In fact, and despite my wholly Western upbringing, there are aspects of Buddhism that have proven useful to me in past crises, and I anticipate that they will continue to be of use now and in the future.

Given my endorsement of other spiritualisms and my commitment to an agnostic posture toward religion, it may seem that my beliefs are weak. But from all this I conclude that there are two kinds of belief, that of ultimate truth and that of practical utility. These ways of believing can — and probably should — occur within the same person. An example of an ultimate belief is whether God truly exists. About this no one can be certain, and I am unsure what benefit any certainty would provide. A practical belief, on the other hand, would be whether one acts as if God exists, and the benefits of that are clear to me as blue sky. Given those benefits, it is no longer evident that ultimate beliefs should influence practical beliefs in any meaningful way. What is evident is that moral benefit should influence behavior and beliefs, and we can at once hold those practical beliefs and also reserve judgement about the ultimate truth in an attitude of humility and grace.
